Feature/m0078 ddg 331 footprint (#101)
MicroEJ/docs: Tutorials/tutorialFootprintGuidelines.rst

4. Link the MicroEJ application with the BSP
5. Analyze ``application.map`` with a text editor

Footprint analysis tools:

- The :ref:`memorymapanalyzer` allows to analyze the memory consumption of different features in the RAM and ROM.
- The :ref:`heapdumper` allows to understand the contents of the Java heap and find problems such as memory leaks.
- The `Dependency discoverer <https://forum.microej.com/t/tool-dependency-discoverer/771>`_  allows to the analyze a piece of code to detect all its dependencies.

How to Analyze a SOAR.map File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A ``SOAR.map`` file is generated after running a MicroEJ launcher on embedded platform.
This file lists every symbol of the application (section, Java class or method, etc) which is embedded and the size that it takes in the ROM or in the RAM.
The ``SOAR.map`` file can be opened using the :ref:`memorymapanalyzer`.

The embedded symbols are grouped into multiple categories. For example, the ``Object`` class and its methods are in the ``LibFoundationEDC`` category.
For each symbol or each category, you can see the size that it takes in ROM (``Image Size``) and in RAM (``Runtime Size``).

> Types, static fields, class names and strings are grouped into separate categories. Since they are packed into separate sections, they can not be distributed in the libraries in which they are used.

Author: integrated and formulated differently:
The linker regroups all the strings in the same section. The same applies to the static fields, the types and the class names. Each of these sections is displayed in its own category.

> Types, static fields, class names and strings are grouped into separate categories. Since they are packed into separate sections, they can not be distributed in the libraries in which they are used.

Reviewer: 👍

When generating the platform, this file is copied from the configuration project to the actual platform project and will later on be converted to binary format and linked with your Java application, even if you use fonts that are different from the system font.

You can therefore comment the system font from the microui.xml file to reduce the flash footprint of your Java application if it does not rely on the system font. Note that you will need to rebuild the platform and then the application to benefit from the footprint reduction.

See `Display Element` section of the :ref:`section_static_init` documentation for more info on system fonts.

Character ranges
""""""""""""""""

When creating a font, reduce the list of characters embedded in the font either:

- on font creation. See `Removing Unused Characters` section of :ref:`section.tool.fontdesigner` documentation for more info on how to achieve that
- on application build. See `Fonts` section of :ref:`chapter.microej.classpath` documentation for more info on how to achieve that

Pixel Transparency
""""""""""""""""""

You can also make sure that the BPP encoding used to achieve transparency for your fonts do not exceed:

> - The maximum alpha level of your display device

Author: i agree its weird. i got this doc from the forum: https://forum.microej.com/t/flash-footprint-how-to-reduce-the-memory-footprint-of-an-application/44
i think the point was that if the screen is 2 colors only (black & white for example), then using 4 BPP for a font is useless.
i suggest `- The pixel depth of your display device`

> - The maximum alpha level of your display device

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think it is better.

See :ref:`section_externalresourceloader` documentation for additional info on external resources management.

Compression
"""""""""""

The default NLS implementation relies on text resources that are not compressed, but you can replace it with your own so as to load them from compressed resources.

Images
^^^^^^

Encoding
""""""""

If you are tight on FLASH memory but have enough RAM and CPU power to decode PNG images on the fly, consider storing your images as PNG resources.
If you are in the opposite configuration (lots of FLASH, but little RAM and CPU power), consider storing your images in raw format.

See :ref:`section_image_generator` documentation for more info on how to achieve that.

Bits Per Pixel (BPP)
""""""""""""""""""""

Make sure to use images with a color depth not exceeding the one of your display device so as to avoid:

- wasting memory
- rendering differences between the target device and the original image resource

External Storage
""""""""""""""""

To save storage on FLASH, images may be accessed from external storage.

See :ref:`section_externalresourceloader` documentation for more info on how to achieve that.

Application Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following application code guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application:

Reviewer 2: And some of them are duplicated with the ones in coding rules.

> The following application code guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application:

Author: we keep the guidelines specific to footprint into this separate doc as discussed.
regarding duplicated coding rules it should be fixed

- Avoid using ``List`` objects, use arrays and ``ArrayTools`` instead. Even though the collections framework is very user-friendly, the code size and the heap usage are much important than when manipulating arrays.
- Avoid using ``Map`` objects, use ``PackedMap`` instead. Packed maps provide the same features than collection maps but are much lighter.
- Avoid using ``StringBuffer``, use ``StringBuilder`` instead. They do the same thing, except that ``StringBuffer`` is synchronized and thus it is heavier.
- Avoid using ``java.util.Timer``, use ``ej.bon.Timer`` instead. EDC's timers are now deprecated.
- Avoid serializing/deserializing data from byte arrays using manual bitwise operations, use ``ByteArray`` instead.
- Use BON constants when executing debug code or optional code, such as ``if (Constants.getBoolean()) { ... }``. That way the optional code will not be embedded if the constant is ``false``.
- Avoid using system properties, use BON constants instead. Constants checks are computed at compile time rather than at run time. Also, manipulating properties requires to embed their name, and strings take a lot of memory.

> - Avoid using synchronization. A ``synchronized`` block takes a lot of extra code size, even though it is only a few characters of code.

Reviewer 2: Mhh ok, this issue is more general, it saves a bit of flash, a bit of runtime and a bit of maintenance.

Author: do you think we should put this rule in the generic java coding rules?

> - Avoid using synchronization. A ``synchronized`` block takes a lot of extra code size, even though it is only a few characters of code.

Reviewer 2: Mhh ok, this issue is more general, it saves a bit of flash, a bit of runtime and a bit of maintenance.

- Avoid calling ``equals()`` and ``hashCode()`` on ``Object`` references. If you do, the method will be embedded for every class which overrides the method.

> - Avoid using the string concatenation operator (``+``) when concatenating more than 2 objects into a single string, use ``StringBuilder`` instead. Multiple ``+`` take more code size than multiple ``StringBuilder.append()`` calls.

Reviewer 2: Are you sure of that? I think that the rule in the coding rules is more accurate:
`Use + operator for single line string concatenation, use a StringBuilder otherwise.`

Author: yes with friviered we looked at the code generated by the + operator and it is terrible. see  M0081MEJA-1272

Reviewer 2: Ok, so I suggest: "Avoid using the string concatenation operator (``+``), use ``StringBuilder`` instead." because it is not dependent of the number of `+`.
And the rule in the coding rules must also be updated.

Author: i think its OK to keep a rule which is not too restrictive in the generic coding rules. this extra rule (never using + operator) is annoying in most cases and is useful only for footprint optimization. i have reworded this rule though.

- Avoid using ``java.util.Calendar``, use an other calendar implementation instead. The calendar implementation of EDC is very heavy even when only a few methods are used.
- Avoid creating anonymous objects (such as ``Runnable`` objects), re-use other classes instead. Indeed, these objects are treated like as whole new class, and each enclosed final variable is treated as a field of the class.

> - Avoid accessing the same field multiple times in the same method, copy the value of the field into a local variable instead. Accessing fields leads o bigger code size and may induce synchronization issues.

Reviewer 2: `leads of` (missing `f`)

Platform Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following platform configuration guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application:

- Use the latest MicroEJ architecture.
- Use tiny MEJ32 architecture. It reduces the code size by ~20% but it is only possible if the size of the application code is lower than 256KB (resources excluded). See dedicated documentation: :ref:`core-tiny`
- Don't embed unnecessary pixel conversion algorithms. This can save up to ~8KB of code size but it requires knowing the format of the resources embedded in the application.
- Use the best optimization level for every source file (for example ``-O3`` or ``-Os`` on GCC).

> - Use an optimal compiler such as IAR rather than GCC.

Reviewer 2: Are you sure about that? Recently I heard that the same platform on GCC and IAR was quite equivalent (perf and size).

Author: yes IAR is much better (jcourcel estimated to 5-10% gain). the C lib is lighter and the padding is more optimal

> - Use an optimal compiler such as IAR rather than GCC.

Reviewer 2: Are you sure about that? Recently I heard that the same platform on GCC and IAR was quite equivalent (perf and size).

- Don't embed UTF-8 encoding by setting the ``cldc.encoding.utf8.included`` property to ``false``. The default encoding (``ISO-8859-1``) is enough for most applications.
- Don't embed ``SecurityManager`` checks by setting the ``com.microej.library.edc.securitymanager.enabled`` property to ``false``. This feature is only useful for multi-app firmwares.
- Don't embed ``toString()`` methods by setting the ``com.microej.library.edc.tostring.included`` property to ``false``.

How to Reduce the Runtime Size of an Application
------------------------------------------------

Generic coding rules may be found in the following tutorial: :ref:`javacodingrules`.

This section provides additional coding rules and good practices in order to reduce the runtime size (RAM) of an application.

Application Code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following application code guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application:

- Define fields as ``short`` or ``byte`` rather than ``int``.

> - Don't declare arrays in ``static final`` fields, use immutables instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Don't declare arrays content in ``static final`` fields, use immutables instead.
```

> - Don't declare arrays in ``static final`` fields, use immutables instead.

Reviewer 2: Already in Java coding rules.

Author: removed from java coding rules. i added some info and moved it to flash size not runtime

- Make sure your widget hierarchy is as flat as possible (avoid unnecessary containers).
- Make sure that the size of the buffers can be configured (by a parameter in the constructor or by a BON constant for example).
- Avoid using immortal arrays to call native methods, use regular arrays instead.

> - Avoid creating multiple threads, timers, or executors, share the instances instead when possible. Each thread requires to allocate dedicated VM stacks which take a lot of memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoid creating multiple threads, timers, or executors, share the instances instead when possible. Each thread requires allocating dedicated VM stacks, which take a lot of memory.
```

> - Avoid creating mutable images (``BufferedImage`` instances) to draw in them and render them later, render directly on the display. Mutable images require allocating a lot of memory from the images heap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoid creating mutable images (``BufferedImage`` instances) to draw in them and render them later, render graphics directly on the display. Mutable images require allocating a lot of memory from the images heap.
```

Platform Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following platform configuration guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application:

> - Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.0KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.5KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task, but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.
```

Author: 1.0KB was enough in my case

> - Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.0KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.

Author: on my platform 1KB was enough. maybe you were calling more complex natives than me?

> - Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.0KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.

Reviewer 3: Running a full jvm-j2me testsuite and getting computing the high watermark. It can differs from platform but 1KB seems to be very low.

> - Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.0KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.

Author: well the user can start at 1KB and increase if he needs more i guess

> - Check the size of the stack of each RTOS task. For example, 1.0KB may be enough for the MicroJVM task but it can be increased to allow deep native calls.

Reviewer 4: Debug Stack dedicated section

> - Check the size of the heap allocated by the RTOS (for example ``configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE`` for FreeRTOS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the size of the heap allocated by the RTOS (for example, ``configTOTAL_HEAP_SIZE`` for FreeRTOS).
```

- Check that the size of the frame buffer matches the size of the screen. Use a partial buffer if the frame buffer does not fit in the RAM.

Debugging Stack Overflows
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If the size that you allocate for a given RTOS task is too low, a stack overflow will occur. To be aware of stack overflows, proceed with the following steps (for FreeRTOS):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the size you allocate for a given RTOS task is too small, a stack overflow will occur. To be aware of stack overflows, proceed with the following steps when using FreeRTOS:
```

> 1. Enable the stack overflow check in ``FreeRTOS.h``:

Reviewer 3: You can add a link here on FreeRTOS documentation: https://www.freertos.org/Stacks-and-stack-overflow-checking.html

.. code-block:: c

> 	#define configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW 1

Reviewer 3: Add a note here, to justify why you choose to use `1` and not `2` for `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW`.

Author: i added a link with full freertos doc. i keep this quick doc as short as possible, the full explanation can be found on the freertos doc

2. Define the hook function in any file of your project (`main.c` for example):

.. code-block:: c

	void vApplicationStackOverflowHook(TaskHandle_t xTask, signed char *pcTaskName) { }

3. Add a new breakpoint inside this function
4. When a stack overflow occurs, the execution will stop at this breakpoint

Application Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following application configuration guidelines are recommended in order to minimize the size of the application.

Java Heap and Immortals Heap
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> - Configure the immortals heap to be as small as possible. The minimum value can be known by calling ``Immortals.freeMemory()`` after all immortals object have been created.

Reviewer 3: Do we expose our HeapProfiler on the web ? A good way to give an implementation of this polling mecanism

Reviewer 2: Yes I think we need to give a better way to find the pick of memory. Polling may not give the right value.
(In the UI, a pick is reached when creating a page while another one is still displayed, this time may be short and the polling may not run at this exact moment).

Author: yes my point was to call it once, at the best moment. but we can link to the profiling lib which is on central repo (com.microej.library#profiling)

> - Configure the immortals heap to be as small as possible. The minimum value can be known by calling ``Immortals.freeMemory()`` after all immortals object have been created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure the immortals heap to be as small as possible. The minimum value can be known by calling ``Immortals.freeMemory()`` after the creation of all the immortal objects.
```

> - Configure the Java heap to fit the needs of the application. The maximum heap usage can be known by calling ``Runtime.freeMemory()`` after ``System.gc()`` at different moments in the lifecycle of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure the Java heap to fit the needs of the application. The maximum heap usage can be known by calling ``Runtime.freeMemory()`` after ``System.gc()`` at different moments in the application's lifecycle.
```

Thread Stacks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> - Configure the maximum number of threads. This number can be known accurately by counting in the code how many ``Thread`` and ``Timer`` objects may run concurrently. Calling ``Thread.getAllStackTraces()`` can help in knowing which threads are running at a given moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure the maximum number of threads. This number can be known accurately by counting in the code how many ``Thread`` and ``Timer`` objects may run concurrently. You can call ``Thread.getAllStackTraces()`` or ``Thread.activeCount()`` to know what threads are running at a given moment.
```

- Configure the number of allocated thread stack blocks. Keep the default value for the size of a block (``512``) and figure out how many blocks each thread requires. This can be done empirically by starting with a low number of blocks and increasing this number as long as the application throws a ``StackOverflowError``.
- Configure the maximum number of blocks per thread. The best choice is to set it to the number of blocks required by the most greedy thread. An other acceptable choice is to set it to the same value than the total number of allocated blocks.

> - Configure the maximum number of monitors. This number can be known accurately by counting the number of concurrent ``synchronized`` blocks. This can also be done empirically by starting with a low number of monitors and increasing this number as long as no exception occurs. Either way, it is recommended to set a slightly higher value than calculated.

Reviewer 3: The function `LLMJVM_dump()` can be called in the BSP or exposed using a SNI native to print information on stack block usage and others usefull information by Java threads. An exemple of this usage/result can be appreciated.

MicroUI Images Heap
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> - Configure the images heap to be as small as possible. The optimal size can be computed empirically. It can also be known accurately by counting the size of every image which may be stored in the images heap at a given moment. One way of doing this is to inspect every occurrence of ``new BufferedImage()`` and ``ResourceImage.loadImage()``.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to use a polling mecanism or an API to have the maximum MicroUI Images heap consumption for a run ?

Author: refer to image heap analyzer https://gitlab.cross/M0092_MicroEJ-Architecture-UI/M0092_UI-ImageHeap-Analyser/-/merge_requests/1

Optimize the Footprint of an Application
========================================

This guide explains how a developer can analyze the footprint of an application and how he can reduce both the ROM and the RAM footprint.

> Temporary Section

Author: fixed

-----------------

> To be added later:

Author: fixed

The embedded symbols are grouped into multiple categories. For example, the ``Object`` class and its methods are in the ``LibFoundationEDC`` category.
For each symbol or each category, you can see the size that it takes in ROM (``Image Size``) and in RAM (``Runtime Size``).

Types, static fields, class names and strings are grouped into separate categories. Since they are packed into separate sections, they can not be distributed in the libraries in which they are used.

How to Analyze a SOAR.xml File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A ``soar/<MainClass>.xml`` file is generated after running a MicroEJ launcher on embedded platform.
This file can be opened using any XML editor.

This file contains the list of:

- every embedded method and its size (in ``selected_methods`` tag)
- every embedded resource and its size (in ``selected_resources`` tag)
- every embedded property and its value (in ``java_properties`` tag)
- every embedded string (in ``selected_internStrings`` tag)
- every embedded type (in ``selected_types`` tag)
- every embedded immutable (in ``selected_immutables`` tag)

How to Analyze an application.map File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A ``<firmware>.map`` file is generated after linking the MicroEJ application with the BSP.

Reviewer 5: is generated by the C toolchain after..

Author: fixed
